We're now looking into salinity power, a thing
that's very little recognized. For instance,
when that brine flows into the Colorado River and
it's diluted, the free energy is as though that
brine has fallen down a 7,000-foot dam.
7,000-foot dam. That's high energy density. If
you're going to let it get in the Colorado anyway,
why, you might as well get the power out of it. Now,
that's kind of a foolish thing, because if you're
going to dam it up, why, you might as well shoot it in
the Gulf and get the power out of it. But this is
something we're now working on, which is salinity
power. It's a totally invisible sort of power. But
every little agricultural drainage ditch that's
going into the Great Salt Lake, for instance, has a
megawatt per cubic foot per second. is the free
energy of that going into the Great Salt Lake. It's
a high. Of all the natural forms of energy, it's
certainly the most concentrated, the natural
forms of energy of that sort of level, not coal or
oil or
lightning, of course. And so we're not going to
overlook it. And we're trying to see it's a strange
sort of energy because of the curiosities of
saltwater. But that's a whole other subject. I
don't know whether you want to go into it or not. No,
I want to know one thing now. Why is saltwater...
Only one thing? Well, I know a lot, but I want to know
one thing immediately. Why is saltwater energy
differently construed than freshwater energy?
Oh, well, no, you've got me wrong. Okay. If you
take, say, brine... and mix it with salt water, or
with fresh water. But you could mix it with sea
water, because it's so much more concentrated. If
you separated them by a semipermeable membrane,
osmotic membrane, and allowed this to go to
equilibrium, the fresh water would go into this
brine. And if you allowed this to take place
without much dilution, it would raise the brine
7,000 feet. You could now pour it off up there and
run a pelton wheel with it or something and
generate energy. Well, this is a real expression
of the free energy. The peculiarity about the
thing is that if you release that much energy in a
reaction like putting brine with fresh water
together, you would expect it to heat up. If you
release that much energy, the energy's got to go
somewhere. You'd expect it to heat up, but it
doesn't. The temperature changes essentially
nothing. And that's because of the peculiarities
of the substance sodium chloride. Sodium
chloride has a strange property. Almost nothing
else has it. And that is that it produces
disorder in the water at just about the rate it
releases energy. So it all goes into what's called
entropy.
If the Great Salt Lake had been anything other than
sodium chloride, let's say it had been magnesium
sulfate, people on their inner tubes floating
down the little streams in the Great Salt Lake
would have burned their rears off. Or if it had been
something else, ammonium nitrate, God forbid, or
ammonium sulfate. Yeah, ammonium sulfate.
They'd have frozen their rears. There'd have been
big temperature changes when that fresh water
flowed in. Nobody would ever doubt that there was
plenty of energy. But because sodium chloride is
the dominant ion, there's a dominant molecule in
there, electrolyte in there, what happens is that
the energy is soaked up into increasing heat
capacity at just the rate it's made. And so it
doesn't appear as temperature. It's there,
perfectly well, in a different form. All we have to
do is learn how to utilize it. It's a tremendous
lot. You see, all of the Midwest is underlain by
brines, as you may know. And there's also Texas, as
God knows, your oil wells. When do they quit
drilling? When they hit the bottom. And that all is
a power source, every bit of it, and by no means an
inconsiderable one.
Did you first become interested in the issue of
food and food expansion through the ocean when you
were in Pakistan? No, I've always been more or
less, I've been interested in him for a long time,
yeah. That was 62, I think. Right. Now, when did you
interview Ravel? Oh, over the July the 4th
weekend. You did, huh? Yeah. Isn't he an
interesting guy, a great guy at his home? Yeah.
Yeah. No, what I want to know is what, as a man
involved in oceans, looking and has been looking
at a long time at things like, food production,
mariculture, what was the impact upon you
psychologically in an underdeveloped country
for the first time like Pakistan? Well, that
wasn't exactly the first time I'd been in that
country.
Well,
your reaction to a country like that, of course, is
very complicated. And one can spend hours talking
about that one subject. A little peculiar, isn't
it? There is so much misery, there's so much
poverty, and people accept it so well. The most
frightening thing, probably, about India and
Pakistan is how fast you can get used to it. I mean,
you shouldn't be able to get used to it. You should
not be able to get used to it. Yet, you know, these
people are not without their total
disadvantages. I mean, without all advantages in
some way. You look at all the crippled people in
that country, and the defective people. You see
them on the streets, and you're horrified by them.
What do we do with our defective people in the
United States? We hide them. They have a hell of a
poor time, don't they? They're old people, the old
crippled people, the insane people. They're all
hidden somewhere. I mean, even people just with
bad facial scars. They're hidden. That country,
they're Those people, at any rate, have a better
time, don't they? They're with society. And those
are kind of interesting points, it seems to me. The
United States has such a culture of perfection,
you see. You really can't even be bald, much less
have your nose missing or a disfiguration, a
crippled arm or something. That country, those
people live a much freer life. So as I say, yeah.
What would our society look like if we really left
all of our people on the streets and accepted them?
Quite different. And the old people, the old
crippled people that would be on the streets in
India and Pakistan are hidden away in our country
and living miserable lives.
As a matter of fact, I was talking to a Texan on the
airplane just about that the other day. He sure got
a point there. He said, never thought of it. Remind
me, does this turn your work into a... I've been to
India quite a bit, because my sister lived there
for 20 years, or 18 years. In India. In what? Well,
her husband was an architect, and she's an artist,
and they They built buildings and designed
buildings and built schools. They built the
University of Karachi and the Institute of
Boddistic Studies at
Heavens and Burma, and quite a number of
structures throughout India. And I used to visit
her occasionally, or visit them. So I was not
totally unacquainted with that area. okay now in
1968 i have bootstrap core oh yeah that's kind of
fun and uh a statement of fact are you asking me well
i'm asking you how it came about
well it that was an idea and i i'm not so sure how well
it's ever going to be utilized but it was an idea of a
car that pulled itself down without these
tremendous weights that you use for core barrels
and took a long core with a very light core. I think
it's the only core that ever took a core that
weighed much more than the device itself. And it's
just an interesting configuration of a core, it
seems to me, that is not without merit.
Taking very deep, very long cores to the ocean
bottom with simple equipment so that you don't
have to have these immense winches. Very large
cores.
OK. OK. Now, it seems to me that in more recent years
you've been- I'd like your wife's opinion on that.
I'll write you and tell you as a matter of fact. All
right. It appears that in recent years you've
published more on marine biology problems. Yeah.
Okay. Is there any, such as fisheries and
productivity? That was reading my question about
Pakistan. Why a turn in this direction? Well, I
don't think it's a turn, exactly. It's a
culmination of some ideas that I've been working
on for quite a few years. Different theories,
alternate theories of food webs, how they're put
together. The marine biologist, are you on? Yes.
The marine biologist suffers from I think the
delusion that he can see everything that goes
forth, that goes on in the ocean. Given enough
plankton nets, enough ships, enough graduate
students in one thing or another, he can trace what
happens to the food material in the ocean. I think
that's totally a delusion. You can't do it. The
food web is far too complicated. Just take the
curious case of reproductive products.
Everything, every adult creature in the ocean is
throwing out eggs and sperm, which account for
maybe 50% of the potential growth of that
population. And it's all invisibly flowing down
into the food web. You see, we're so misled by our
terrestrial experience. We think that the
immediate effect of reproduction is to add to the
adult stocks by direct transfer of biomass. That
is, a cow has a calf. The calf is a large proportion
of an adult. It feeds on paternal sources. It
immediately then, after it has weaned, feeds on
the same source that the adults feed on and adds to
the adult biomass. The ocean is a totally
different situation, except for the marine
mammals and some sharks. This isn't the way to do
this at all. The reproductive products are
subtracted from the adult biomass. The eggs are
pulled out of the adult biomass. The amount of
survival of that material that comes back to the
adult is absolutely zero. The egg that survives
down here goes through the larval form, juvenile
form, and finally becomes an adult. The survival
of that egg is zero. So we forget that the ocean is in
many respects opposed, opposite, than the land.
Reproductive products, which are a major tax on
all creatures, is not added to the adult biomass in
the ocean, but subtracted from it. And I think we
need these kinds of totally different
viewpoints. And we need to formalize them in some
way. And that's what I've been doing the last few
years. You see, we're much misled by the fact that
we're terrestrial creatures. The ocean is, to a
great extent, a foreign and dimly understood
system. And the life in it is differently adapted.
We forget those differences. We tend to treat it
like a rare land ecology. Is it fair to say that
you're more optimistic about food production in
the oceans than your colleagues? I wouldn't speak
for my colleagues, but I'm quite optimistic about
food production in the ocean, yes. I think we've
got to understand that we have to act rationally. I
don't think we can act this sort of a way of, for
instance, passing a law that we must protect the
porpoises, we have to first understand what's the
relationship between porpoises and tuna. It may
be in the 30 or 40 years of intensive tuna fishery
that we've greatly stimulated the porpoise. It
may be there in all or out of proportion. It's
marvelous to me that tuna can survive in
competition of the porpoise, this profligate,
warm-blooded animal inhabiting the ocean. If
you've ever seen a school of porpoises sweep
through a gulf, it's incredible. frothing water
where they clean everything out as they go. Now,
isn't it funny that we should, because of soft
hearts or something, should now have passed a law
that says, ah, we must do this thing, which may be
the worst possible tactic, is to pull the tuna out
without hurting the porpoise, which are in direct
competition with one another. Or do we know
whether they're in direct competition? Do we know
that 40 years of tuna fishery has stimulated the
porpoise or not? Do we know that they're in
abnormal abundance or normal abundance? We don't
know. We just pass a law that says you've got to
protect the porpoise. That may really extinguish
the tuna fishery.
You see, all our marine fisheries are conducted in
this way that stimulate the unwanted species. We
have no use for the porpoise. Even the Japanese can
hardly use it. And By law, now, we make a technique
that reduces the wanted species and increases the
unwanted species. I went up to British Columbia
not long ago, and here they have radio advisories
to the salmon fishery about where you can fish
without getting your net full of dogfish. Now,
this is the same technique as the boy that learns
how to catch the trout out of the pond without
catching a sucker, isn't he? He increases the
suckers and decreases the trout. Now, here's a
whole organization to decrease the salmon and
increase the dogfish.
You see, you've got to take the weeds. The
fisheries in the world are conducted like a blind
man who can't see the weeds in his garden and is
always pulling up the corn instead of the weeds and
then wondering why he's got less and less corn each
year.
Hmm. So are you suggesting, then, that more study
ought to be done? Well, I'm just trying to point out
these viewpoints, which are different than the
conventional, the traditional way in which
people have gone to look at these things. Many
people say that fishing is already an optimum,
that the ocean cannot produce many more
fisheries, that fishing is a very inefficient
way. It depends on what level you do this, of
course, doesn't it? And what level you conduct
your fisheries. We're conducting, if you were to
look at it in terrestrial terms, we're conducting
our fisheries now as though we were trying to feed
the human race on tigers. It just takes too
god-amany cows to feed the tigers, doesn't it?
Actually, we're probably even higher than that.
Whatever eats tigers, I've forgotten. Is there
anything?
We're conducting our fisheries at that level.
No tribe in its right mind ever tried to feed itself
on tigers. It took too many deer or buffalo or
whatever it was. So the closer we get down to things
like the Anchoveta fishery and Peru and so forth,
the larger and larger. And the more we go towards
the juveniles, the mortality of these things in
the ocean is so great that probably we are
justified in taking juveniles. But the thing we do
have to do is see what the effects of our fishery are
on the competitors. see we're always stimulating
we're always stimulating the competitors of what
we want to catch that those kind of things have to be
pointed out yet the law is so indurate that there's
really no way to have any flexibility you see there
is no way to set up a commercial fishery that really
trims and controls a fishery in multi-species
modes that it should. There's no theory to handle
it. I tried to develop a theory, and it looks like it
might make some sense.
What was Joint Task Force Number One, to whom you
submitted numerous secret reports? That was the
Joint Task Force Bikini Hunt. First test. Abel and
Baker test. Now, much of the material you
published from 45 to 47 from Berkeley was related
to the physical surveillances of beaches along
the Pacific. Was this defense information for
amphibious landings primarily? Well, it was more
general than that. It was trying to understand the
nature of beaches and amphibious landings
wherever it was, not defending the Pacific coast
against amphibious landings, no, but rather
guarding our own amphibious landings. Could you
describe any work that you did on sea mines that's
no longer classified? What were you? Oh, boy.
Let's see. Can I come up with that?
Well, as I said very early, there's quite a bit I
can't certainly still classify. quite different
ideas about sea mines
one thing i can say is i took almost a year off back in
1952 or so 53 maybe to study landmines uh under the
theory that landmine is essentially the same kind
of a weapon as a sea mine except it has the ability to
evolve much more rapidly every Texas farmer that
gets into the army thinks he can go out and play
around with some primacord and explosives and
develop a new land mine, and nobody in their right
mind fiddles around with a sea mine. There you're
talking about you're on a ship. You can't possibly
screw around being innovative with 300 pounds of
TNT.
Everybody feels they know something about
landmines, and they can make innovation. And
there are some tremendous innovations in
landmines. In fact, they'd have near beat us in
Korea and in
Vietnam also. The innovations were tremendous.
What I was trying to see was, does this evolution of
landmines have a forecasting ability on the
evolution of sea mines are some of these
technologies that were developed and which were
so extremely difficult to combat that were
developed with land mines by small-scale
innovation transferable to sea mines. I thought
that was a reasonably good contribution I made on
that subject. And here you have an evolutionary
sequence that you can begin to understand and how
what the steps have been between measures and
countermeasures and counter-countermeasures
and so forth, to see if those were transferable
into the ocean, and indeed they are. Is nuclear
blasting to form harbors and channels still a
feasible idea? Oh, sure. The Russians have been
doing it, of course. It's not a feasible idea for
the United States to do. I think the French might do
it. to make harbors. Those great harbors of
Bikini, I rode around in one of them two weeks after
the blast. Beautiful, vast blue harbors that make
supertankers a reality. Bring in a 200-foot draft
ship, and it can be made like that. But the whole
plowshare program, was conducted with such
insensitivity, I think, that it does not become a
possibility for the United States to proceed in
any way. You know, they were going to blast a
channel through the Sierra Nevadas to let the smog
out of Los Angeles, or start out with blasting a new
sea level canal through Panama. Things that
scared people to death. Were you involved, by the
way, with that plan to open up a new Panama Canal? To
some extent, yeah. Did you think it were a feasible
idea? From
an engineering standpoint? Yeah, from an
engineering standpoint. Of course. From an
engineering standpoint. From a social
engineering standpoint, it was idiocy.
You've got to start out small or something like
that. You know what I wanted to do? I want to take my
family and go out to Bikini and live around the
edges of the crater out there and take some
National Geographic type articles living on the
lip of a nuclear crater. This great mile and a half
harbor, 300 feet deep, with new fish coming in, new
corals, new development in one thing or another.
That was kind of the way. that one wanted to feed
this into the social system. A National
Geographic harbor of a family of scientists went
out and lived on the lips of a bikini crater. That
would have made sense to me. To me, too. What
happened to that idea? I didn't get anywhere with
it.
In fact, some of my best writing is undoubtedly in
proposals. Never got funded. My most persuasive,
my most thoughtful, my most penetrating writing
in Boston, supposedly.
What is the future of deep-sea ports? Open-sea
ports? Open-sea ports. Well, of course, as far as
petroleum and liquid fuels and things like that,
it's gigantic as far as it's all going to be
conducted. Ships are going to be built at sea, are
being built at sea, assembled at sea at any rate,
and they're never going to touch shore. uh you
consider this inevitable it's not only
inevitable it's here it uh what about the idea of
the proposed sea dock in the gulf i don't know
anything about the sea dock in the gulf well the
concept of is that a physician a hospital hospital
so in other words that you see Is it fair to say that
you see these docks being built for the transport
of oil in places like the Gulf here? I don't know if
they're going to be docks. They're going to be
monobullies of some sort, I think. Why should they
be docks? But I see no reason. Well, one thing I
really don't understand. You can perhaps
elucidate me. What is the tremendous virtue of a
free port? I mean, look at Hong Kong. Well, of
course, now, it's a special case because it's an
outlet of goods from mainland China. But free
ports around the world prosper tremendously.
What happens if you have a free port right in the
middle of the ocean somewhere? All the ships have
to come in and trade goods. You can have a nuclear
power plant there to run it. It's a big enclosed
thing. You can have some fisheries, all kinds of
things you can do that would not be accepted in
coastal waters, like the release of fisheries
waste and so on, nuisance level of nuclear waste.
And you can have a free port. Is there virtue in
having just a free port out in the middle of the
ocean somewhere where people can trade without
tax?
What is it? I'm not sure countries can move any
longer to free trade. Say what? I'm not sure
countries can move any longer to free trade. They
can. I'm not sure that's economically feasible
for countries. Well, very few of them have. Well,
export limits are much fewer than import limits.
So in principle, you can. you can have some sort of
free trade in the middle of the sea. Is this an
idiotic idea? No. You don't think so? No. What
about Spillhouse's cities on the sea? Well, I
think that's all fun. And John Craven, too, of
course, is working on this. That's all great fun. I
don't know why people want to live there. I can
count a billion places where you could sit down in
Los Angeles and never find it again, but Most of the
world is uninhabited, as you well know. It's only
the coastal strips that is covered over by this
incrustation of human beings.